---
title: Problem Details For CoAP APIs
abbrev: CoRE Problem Details
docname: draft-ietf-core-problem-details-latest
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: ART
workgroup: CoRE Working Group
keyword: CoAP, API, Problem Details

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: "T. Fossati"
    name: "Thomas Fossati"
    organization: "arm"
    email: thomas.fossati@arm.com
 -
    ins: "J. Jiménez"
    name: "Jaime Jiménez"
    organization: "Ericsson"
    email: jaime@iki.fi

 -
    ins: "K. Hartke"
    name: "Klaus Hartke"
    organization: "Ericsson"
    email: klaus.hartke@ericsson.com

--- abstract

This document defines a "problem detail" as a way to carry machine-readable
details of errors in a CoAP response to avoid the need to define new error
response formats for CoAP APIs.

--- middle

# Introduction

CoAP {{!RFC7252}} response codes are sometimes not sufficient to convey enough
information about an error to be helpful.

This specification defines a simple and extensible CBOR {{!RFC7049}} format to
suit this purpose.  It is designed to be reused by CoAP APIs, which can
identify distinct "problem types" specific to their needs.

Thus, API clients can be informed of both the high-level error class (using the
response code) and the finer-grained details of the problem (using this
format).

The format presented is largely inspired by the Problem Details for HTTP APIs
defined in {{?RFC7807}}.

## Requirements Language

{::boilerplate bcp14}

# CoAP Problem Details Definition

A CoAP Problem Details is encoded as a CBOR map with the following members:

* "ns" (int) - A code-point that defines the namespace under which the "type"
  field needs to be interpreted.  This is a mandatory field.

* "type" (uint) - A code-point that identifies the problem type within the
  namespace.  This is a mandatory field.

* "title" (text) - A short, human-readable summary of the problem type.  It
  SHOULD NOT change from occurrence to occurrence of the problem.

* "response-code" (8-bit uint) - The CoAP response code ({{!RFC7252}}, Section
  5.9) generated by the origin server for this occurrence of the problem.

* "detail" (text) - A human-readable explanation specific to this occurrence of
  the problem.

* "instance" (uri) - A URI reference that identifies the specific occurrence of
  the problem.  It may or may not yield further information if dereferenced.

Consumers MUST use "ns" and "type" as primary identifiers for the problem type;
the "title" string is advisory and included only for consumers who are not
aware of the semantics of the "ns" and "type" values.

The "response-code" member, if present, is only advisory; it conveys the CoAP
response code used for the convenience of the consumer.  Generators MUST use
the same response code in the actual CoAP response, to assure that generic CoAP
software that does not understand this format still behaves correctly.
Consumers can use the response-code member to determine what the original
response code used by the generator was, in cases where it has been changed
(e.g., by an intermediary or cache), and when message payloads persist without
CoAP information (e.g., in an events log or analytics database).  Generic CoAP
software will still use the CoAP response code.

The "detail" member, if present, ought to focus on helping the client correct
the problem, rather than giving debugging information.  Consumers SHOULD NOT
parse the "detail" member for information; extensions (see
{{sec-new-attributes}}) are more suitable and less error-prone ways to obtain
such information.

Note that "instance" accepts relative URIs; this means that it must be resolved
relative to the document's base URI, as per {{!RFC3986}}, Section 5.

## CDDL

The definition in CDDL format {{!RFC8610}} of a Problem Details for CoAP is
provided in {{fig-cddl}}.

~~~
{::include coap-problem-details.cddl}
~~~
{: #fig-cddl title="CoAP Problem Details: CDDL Definition"}

# Extensibility

The format presented can be extended at two separate points that allow the
definition of:

* New problem type values (see {{sec-new-types}}); and
* New problem attributes (see {{sec-new-attributes}}).

## Defining New Problem Types
{: #sec-new-types}

The mechanism for defining new problem types is designed to allow private use,
for example by organisations or projects, while at the same time supporting the
use of this error format in public protocols and APIs, as well as ease of
transition between the two -- for example if an API is first developed
internally to an organisation and then open-sourced.  Another critical design
objective is to enable delegating the administration of the code-points space
to entities (and experts) that are "closer" to the actual usage and intended
meaning of the code-points.  In fact, an explicit desiderata is to avoid having
experts looking over a very big and diverse semantic space.

To meet these goal, new problem types are always defined (and have a meaning)
within a namespace.  The namespace range is itself partitioned in three
separate sub-ranges: a completely private space, one devoted to private
organisations and projects, and a third one used for public APIs and protocols.
The rules for registering a new namespace are outlined in
{{iana-namespace-registry}}.

The registration procedures for new problem types are not defined in this
document.  At a minimum, though, new problem type definitions SHOULD document:

1. A parent namespace;
2. Their own code-point;
3. A title that appropriately describes the problem type (think short); and
4. The CoAP response-code for it to be used with.

A problem type definition may specify additional attributes on the
problem details map (see {{sec-new-attributes}}).

(Note on renumbering: moving a set of error types from the private to the
public space needs only changing the namespace identifier while leaving all
error types the same.)

## Defining New Problem Attributes
{: #sec-new-attributes}

Problem type definitions MAY extend the problem details object with additional
attributes to convey additional, problem-specific information.

Clients consuming problem details MUST ignore any such extensions that they do
not recognize; this allows problem types to evolve and include additional
information in the future.

CoAP Problem Details can be extended via the coap-problem-details-extension
CDDL socket (see Section 3.9 of {{!RFC8610}}).

# Security Considerations

The security and privacy considerations outlined in Section 5 of {{?RFC7807}}
apply in full.

# IANA Considerations

## Registration of a Content-Format identifier for application/coap-problem+cbor

This document requests that IANA registers the following Content-Format to the
"CoAP Content-Formats" sub-registry, within the "Constrained RESTful
Environments (CoRE) Parameters" registry, from the Expert Review space
(0..255):

   | Media Type                    | Encoding | ID   | Reference |
   | application/coap-problem+cbor | ---      | TBD1 | RFCthis   |

## New Registries

This document requests that IANA create the following new registries:

* CoAP Problem Namespaces ({{iana-namespace-registry}});
* CoAP Problem Details ({{iana-details-registry}}).

### CoAP Problem Details Registry
{: #iana-details-registry}

The "CoAP Problem Details" registry keeps track of the allocation of the
integer values used as index values in the coap-problem-details CBOR map.

Future registrations for this registry are to be made based on {{!RFC8126}} as
described in {{tab-details}}.

   | Range            | Registration Procedures |
   | 0...N            | Standards Action        |
   | N+1...4294967295 | Specification Required  |
{: #tab-details title="CoAP Problem Details Registration Procedures"}

All negative values are reserved for Private Use.

Initial registrations for the "CoAP Problem Details" registry are provided in
{{tab-details-init}}.  Assignments consist of an integer index value, the item
name, and a reference to the defining specification.

   | Index | Index Name    | Specification |
   | 0     | ns            | RFCthis       |
   | 1     | type          | RFCthis       |
   | 2     | title         | RFCthis       |
   | 3     | response-code | RFCthis       |
   | 4     | detail        | RFCthis       |
   | 5     | instance      | RFCthis       |
{: #tab-details-init title="CoAP Problem Details Initial Registrations"}

### CoAP Problem Namespace Registry
{: #iana-namespace-registry}

The "CoAP Problem Namespace" registry keeps track of the problem namespace
values.

Future registrations for this registry are to be made based on {{!RFC8126}} as
described in {{tab-types}}.

   | Range            | Registration Procedures |
   | -L...-1          | First Come First Served |
   | 0...M            | Standards Action        |
   | M+1...4294967295 | Specification Required  |
{: #tab-types title="CoAP Problem Types Registration Procedures"}

All negative values less than L are reserved for Private Use.

The "CoAP Problem Namespace" registry has three columns as shown in
{{tab-ns-fmt}}.  Assignments consist of an integer index value, the item
description, and a reference to the defining specification.

   | Value | Description | Specification |
   | empty | empty | empty |
{: #tab-ns-fmt title="CoAP Problem Namespace Registry"}

The registry is initially empty.

--- back

# Examples
{: #sec-examples}

This section presents a series of examples in CBOR diagnostic notation
{{RFC7049}}.  The examples are fictitious.  No identification with actual
products is intended or should be inferred.  All examples involve the same CoAP
problem type (5, with pretend semantics "unknown key id") defined in the
private namespace "-33455".

<!--
The reader can think of it as a distinct error condition that might happen in a
private RESTful API for crypto key management that is deployed inside an
enterprise network.
-->

## Minimalist

The example in {{fig-private-ns-minimal}} has the most compact representation.
By avoiding any non-mandatory field, the Problem encodes to seven bytes in
total.  This is suitable for a constrained receiver that happens to have
precise knowledge of the semantics associated with the namespace and type
code-points.

~~~
{
    / ns /   0: -33455, / a private namespace /
    / type / 1: 5       / "unknown key id" semantics /
}
~~~
{: #fig-private-ns-minimal title="Private Namespace: Minimal Payload"}

## Full-Fledged

The example in {{fig-private-ns-full}} has all the mandatory as well as the
optional fields populated.  This format is appropriate for an unconstrained
receiver.  For example, an edge gateway forwarding to a log server that needs
to gather as much contextual information as possible, including details about
the error condition, the associated CoAP response code, and even the URL
describing the specific error instance.

~~~
{
    / ns /            0: -33455,
    / type /          1: 5,
    / title /         2: "unknown key id",
    / response-code / 3: 132, / 4.04 Not Found /
    / detail /        4: "Key with id 0x01020304 not registered",
    / instance /      5: 32("https://private-api.example/errors/5")
}
~~~
{: #fig-private-ns-full title="Private Namespace: Full Payload"}

## Full-Fledged with Extensions

The last example ({{fig-private-ns-full-ext}}) makes use of the built-in
extension mechanism described in {{sec-new-attributes}} to provide some context
specific information - in this made up scenario a list of possible key ids is
provided to the receiving end.  This richer format might be enabled for debug
or tracing purposes, possibly on a per-transaction basis.  Note that the map
index for key-ids key is minted from the private (negative) space.

~~~
{
    / ns /            0: -33455,
    / type /          1: 5,
    / title /         2: "unknown key id",
    / response-code / 3: 132, / 4.04 Not Found /
    / detail /        4: "Key with id 0x01020304 not registered",
    / instance /      5: 32("https://private-api.example/errors/5"),
    / key-ids /       -1: [ 0x01020300, 0x01020301, 0x01020302 ]
}
~~~
{: #fig-private-ns-full-ext title="Private Namespace: Full Payload and Extension"}

# Doing it with CoRAL

CoRAL {{?I-D.ietf-core-coral}} provides a way to address the same problem that
is solved by the format described in this document.  (Refer to section 5.2.3 of
{{?I-D.ietf-core-coral}} for initial discussion around CoRAL Error Responses.)

By abstracting the serialization aspects (CBOR, JSON, etc.), the transport
protocol (HTTP, CoAP, etc.) and its response codes, while also providing
compression of the involved resources, CoRAL can potentially support a more
general solution than the one discussed here, in particular one that also
supersedes {{?RFC7807}}.

## Examples
{: #sec-coral-examples}

In this section, the examples from {{sec-examples}} are converted to CoRAL.

The main differences are:

* CoRAL is using an array of alternating keys and values instead of a map with
  array values to get a multi-dict;
* CoRAL uses {{?I-D.ietf-core-href}} as an alternative to URIs that is
  optimized for constrained nodes;
* CoRAL uses its own code-point allocation scheme.

### Minimalist

~~~
#using <http://example.org/vocabulary/problem-details#>
#using ex = <http://vocabulary.private-api.example/#>

type            ex:unknown-key-id
~~~

### Full-Fledged

~~~
#using <http://example.org/vocabulary/problem-details#>
#using ex = <http://vocabulary.private-api.example/#>

type            ex:unknown-key-id
title           "unknown key id"
response-code   132
detail          "Key with id 0x01020304 not registered"
instance        <https://private-api.example/errors/5>
~~~

### Full-Fledged with Extensions

~~~
#using <http://example.org/vocabulary/problem-details#>
#using ex = <http://vocabulary.private-api.example/#>

type            5
title           "unknown key id"
response-code   132
detail          "Key with id 0x01020304 not registered"
instance        <https://private-api.example/errors/5>
ex:key-id       0x01020300
ex:key-id       0x01020301
ex:key-id       0x01020302
~~~

# Acknowledgments
{: numbered="no"}

Mark Nottingham and Erik Wilde, authors of RFC 7807.  Carsten Bormann and Klaus
Hartke for discussion on the problem space and extensibility requirements.
